Section 3. Testing and Experimenting with your package
---

## 1. Basic Testing

Once your Python package is installed whether in development mode (`-e`) or
using the built distribution-you can easily perform initial manual tests.
These tests help verify the basic functionality of your package.
Here's a simple process to get started:

**Open a Python Interpreter:** Launch a Python interpreter in your terminal with the python command.

```
python
```

**Import and Test Your Package:** In the Python interpreter, try importing your package and running some basic commands:
```python
import tutorial
# This should print the package location (site-packages or local directory).
print(tutorial.__file__)

from tutorial import wrangler
datum = wrangler.generate_ad_data(50)
print(len(datum))  # Verify the generated data length.
```

**Validate Package Installation:** The path printed by `tutorial.__file__`
will indicate whether the package is installed in your site-packages
(for a regular installation) or in your local directory (for an editable
installation).

___

## 2. Integrating Pytest

Beyond manual testing, it's beneficial to incorporate automated
testing into your development workflow. pytest is an excellent tool
for this purpose, offering a range of features for comprehensive
testing. Here's how you can leverage pytest in your package:

- **Basic function tests:** Verify that individual functions behave as expected.
- **Integration tests:** Ensure that different parts of your package work together correctly.
- **Regression tests:** Check that new changes don't break existing functionality.

In this tutorial, we have added a few simple testing functionalities
to exemplify the usage of pytest on the project.

### Testing imports:

```python
def test_imports():
    from tutorial import wrangler
    assert hasattr(wrangler, 'generate_ad_data')
```

### Testing the generate_ad_data:

```python
def test_generate_ad_data():
    from tutorial.wrangler import generate_ad_data
    data = generate_ad_data(10)
    assert len(data) == 10  # Validate the data count.
```

### Testing Data Type of AdUnit:

```python
def test_ad_unit_type():
    from tutorial.wrangler import generate_ad_data
    from tutorial.schemas.ad_unit import AdUnit
    data = generate_ad_data(1)
    assert isinstance(data[0], AdUnit)  # Confirm that data is of AdUnit type.
```

### Testing the Entire Pipeline:
```python
def test_pipeline():
    from tutorial.wrangler import generate_ad_data, clean_data, preprocess_data, analyze_ad_performance
    data = generate_ad_data(10)
    cleaned_data = clean_data(data)
    preprocessed_data = preprocess_data(cleaned_data)
    model, predictions = analyze_ad_performance(preprocessed_data)
    assert len(predictions) == 2  # Or any other relevant assertion.
```

Integrating pytest enhances the reliability and maintainability of your
package by automating the testing process and enabling rapid identification
of issues.

___

## 3. Running tests

Testing is a crucial part of maintaining the reliability and robustness
of any software project.


### Creating test cases

Place all your test cases within the [tests/](../tests) directory.

Follow Python's standard naming convention for test files: start each filename
with test_. For example, test_analyser.py.

### Writing Test Cases

Each test file should correspond to a module in your `src` directory.

Write test functions that are descriptive and cover a wide range
of scenarios. For example, in `test_analyser.py`, you might have
`test_analyser_accuracy()` or `test_analyser_exceptions()`.

Utilize Python's assert statements to check the outcomes
of your test cases.

### Running
In your terminal, navigate to your project directory and simply run:

```bash
pytest
```

This command will automatically discover and run all the tests in
the `tests/` directory that follow the `test_*` naming pattern.

**Understanding Pytest Output**

Pytest will provide a detailed report on the screen, showing which
tests passed and which failed. For each failed test, pytest displays
the associated error message, making it easier to identify and
resolve issues.



___
## 4. Best Practices for Effective Testing

- **Regular Testing:** Make a habit of running tests frequently to catch issues early.
- **Comprehensive Coverage:** Aim to cover as much code as possible with your tests, including edge cases.
- **Continuous Integration:** Consider integrating testing into a CI/CD pipeline for automated testing on each commit.
