Section 5: Integrating GitHub Actions with Pre-Commit and Pytest
---

GitHub Actions is a powerful CI/CD platform that allows you to automate
your workflow directly from your GitHub repository. By integrating GitHub
Actions with pre-commit and pytest, you can ensure that every code change
pushed to your repository adheres to quality standards and passes all tests.

## 1. Setting pre-commit

### Create a Workflow File

In your repository, create a new file in the `.github/workflows/` directory.

```bash
touch .github/workflows/pre-commit.yml
```

The `pre-commit.yml` naming is not mandatory, you might name the file as you see fit.

### Configure the Workflow

Define the steps in your `pre-commit.yml` file to install and run pre-commit hooks on every
push and pull request. Here's an example configuration:

```yaml
name: Pre-Commit

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  pre-commit:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - uses: actions/setup-python@v3
      with:
        python-version: '3.x'
    - uses: pre-commit/action@v3.0.0
```

This workflow triggers on every push and pull request,
setting up a Python environment and running pre-commit checks.

___

## 2. Setting Up GitHub Actions for Pytest

### Create a Workflow File

In your repository, create a new file in the `.github/workflows/` directory.

```bash
touch .github/workflows/build-and-test.yml
```

### Configure the Workflow

Similar to the pre-commit setup, define steps to install Python,
dependencies, and run pytest.

Example configuration:

```yaml
name: Python Tests

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  build:

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    environment: staging

    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3

    - name: Set up Python 3.X
      uses: actions/setup-python@v3
      with:
        python-version: "3.X"

    - name: Installing tutorial package
      run: |
        python -m pip install -e .

    - name: Install dependencies
      run: |
        python -m pip install --upgrade pip
        if [ -f requirements.txt ]; then pip install -r requirements.txt; fi

    - name: Running pytests
      run: |
        pytest
```

This setup ensures that pytest is run in an isolated environment on GitHub's servers,
testing your code in a clean state. This two simple steps on github actions guarantee the following:

- **Automated Quality Checks:** With every push and pull request, your code is automatically checked for formatting issues and tested.
- **Immediate Feedback:** Developers get immediate feedback on their commits and pull requests, enhancing the code review process.
- **Consistency:** This setup enforces coding standards and testing requirements, ensuring consistency across all contributions.


Integrating GitHub Actions with pre-commit and pytest adds a robust layer of automation to your workflow.
It not only streamlines the development process but also reinforces the quality and reliability of your code base.
