Section 6: Containerizing with Docker for an Integrated Development Environment
---

Containerizing your Python project with Docker offers a seamless and consistent development environment.
In this section, we'll cover how to wrap your Python package in a Docker container, install it
natively within the container, and use Jupyter Lab for interactive testing and experimentation.

## Docker setup

### Creating a Dockerfile

Let's start by creating a Dockerfile in the root of your project. This file defines the environment
and commands to build your Docker image.

```bash
touch Dockerfile
```

In this context, the naming `Dockerfile` is mandatory for the docker runner, otherwise further parameters
might be needed.

### Docker file building

Start with a base image that includes Python. For example

```angular2html
FROM python:3.8-slim
```

Copy your requirements file and install the dependencies:

```angular2html
COPY requirements.txt /tmp/
RUN pip install -r /tmp/requirements.txt
```

Copy your project files into the container and install your package:

```angular2html
COPY . /app/
WORKDIR /app
RUN pip install -e .
```

**(Optional)**  Set Up Jupyter Lab: If you want to include Jupyter Lab for interactive testing:

```angular2html
RUN pip install jupyterlab
CMD ["jupyter", "lab", " - ip=0.0.0.0", " - allow-root", " - no-browser"]
```

### Creating docker image

```angular2html
docker build -t tutorial-project .
```

Additional commands:
```angular2html
> docker ps -a

> docker images
```

### Running docker container

```angular2html
docker run -p 8888:8888 tutorial-project
```

___
## Accessing Jupyter Lab

If you've set up Jupyter Lab, it will be accessible at http://localhost:8888.
The terminal output will provide a token to log in. The usage of docker will guarantee yoy, feature such as

- **Consistency:** Docker ensures that your project runs in the same environment, regardless of where it's deployed, reducing the "it works on my machine" problem.
- **Isolation:** Running your project in a container isolates it from the host system, minimising conflicts between different projects' dependencies.
- **Reproducible:** Docker containers can be shared and run by other team members or in production environments, ensuring everyone is working with the same setup.

By containerisation your Python project with Docker, you create a consistent, isolated, and
reproducible development environment. Incorporating tools like Jupyter Lab within your Docker
setup further enhances the development experience, providing a powerful platform for interactive
testing and exploration.
